JUDY WOODRUFF: Aid
organizations, especially
those working in conflict
zones like Yemen,
say it's crucial that they
remain politically neutral.
They say it's the only way
they can safely do their jobs.
But a recent investigation by
The New York Times reveals how
one company may have endangered
that neutrality for many
humanitarian groups.
William Brangham has that story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: UNICEF and
the Red Cross are two of the
humanitarian groups working
in Yemen, where a brutal civil
war has killed or injured
at least 12,000 people.
The Times today revealed that
a logistics company known
as Transoceanic Development
wasn't only helping those aid
groups get their supplies into
Yemen, but the company was also
secretly helping U.S.
special forces do the same.
The Times reports how this
dual relationship could drive
suspicion that the aid groups
were somehow acting as agents
of the U.S. government.
I'm joined now by Eric Schmitt.
He's one of The Times'
reporters who broke this story.
And by Daryl Grisgraber.
She's a senior advocate
at Refugees International,
which is an aid group
that operates in the
Middle East, Africa,
and Southeast Asia.
She previously worked for
Amnesty International.
Welcome to you both.
Eric Schmitt, I would
like to start with you.
Let's just go over some
of these details again.
So this logistics company,
Transoceanic Development,
is working to deliver
and help deliver aid
supplies to Yemen for these
aid groups, while they're also
doing some work for U.S. special
forces.
Can you explain those two
relationships a little bit?
ERIC SCHMITT, The New
York Times: Right.
So, Transoceanic is this giant
global logistics company.
And its job is really to ferry
materials and shipments all over
the world for various customers.
And a couple of its customers,
as you mentioned, are the
Red Cross and for UNICEF.
And, in this case, they did
some warehousing, they did some
basic bringing materials and
shipments of supplies into Yemen
that would then be delivered to
-- through other humanitarian
organizations to the needy
in that strife-torn country.
So that's one of their jobs.
And they were very
open about this.
And when Mr. Darden was
kidnapped, his story became
quite public, because...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This
is the main, the central
character in your story,
who was sort of organizing
this organization in Yemen.
He was kidnapped by some
rebels there, and then was
released after several years.
ERIC SCHMITT: That's right.
Scott Darden was the country
director for Transoceanic.
So, he was responsible kind of
at the front end for getting
these shipments of aid into
Yemen.
So, that story is quite public.
What's new here is that it
turned out that Transoceanic
and Mr. Darden were also working
on secret contracts
involving shipping similar
types of materials into
Yemen for the military,
specifically for the very
specialized special operations
forces, the commandos, who are
operating in Yemen today.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And just
for the record, there's no
evidence that the aid groups had
any idea that the company they
were hiring to do work for
them was also doing this work
for the U.S. government.
ERIC SCHMITT: That's right.
Spokesmen for both UNICEF and
for the Red Cross said they
had no idea that Transoceanic
was carrying out these kind of
contracts with the military on
the logistics side of things.
And had they known, they may
have opted for another company.
But I must say, there aren't a
lot of companies that get into
these kind of very dangerous
war zone type of places.
So it's not unusual to find
a company like Transoceanic
dealing with multiple kinds of
customers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
So, Daryl Grisgraber,
what is your reaction?
You read this story.
What was your response?
DARYL GRISGRABER, Refugees
International: Initially,
we were all quite
dismayed as humanitarians,
because there's meant to be a
very strict separation between
military assistance, political
assistance, and
humanitarian assistance.
And there is quite a lively
debate that goes on right now
in the humanitarian world about
keeping those separate
and when and how is it
possible to combine them.
But the initial reaction
then is, because these got
combined, it's going to look bad
for humanitarians everywhere.
Humanitarians tend to
be a little bit under
suspicion anyway, just
because they're foreigners
often in a country,
where we talk about
the U.N. or big INGOs.
And they operate very
significantly on trust,
building trust with
the people they serve,
as well as the governments
that allow them to operate.
And to know now that the
humanitarian principle
of neutrality in
particular has potentially
been compromised or
even perceived to be
compromised is going to
affect all humanitarians.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, the
concern, just to spell it out
even more clearly, is that if
a government or groups operating
in a certain country somehow
thought that you were receiving
shipments from a company that
was also working for a partisan
group in that nation as well,
that the humanitarian aid
workers might come under attack.
DARYL GRISGRABER:
Oh, for sure, yes.
Organizations could be banned
from operating in a country.
The humanitarian individuals
could come under attack.
And, in general, it's really
important to remember that
this just erodes the trust that
allows humanitarians to do
work everywhere and get access
to the people who really need
them the most, because
that often involves
really emphasizing the
fact that you are neutral
and not on the side of a
conflict, and so it's OK for
you to be serving people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Eric Schmitt,
in your piece you remind us
that there was a more notorious
incident where the CIA
was operating in Pakistan,
and it literally did
blur these very lines
that we're talking about.
Can you tell us what
happened in that story?
ERIC SCHMITT: Sure, absolutely.
In an effort to try and
determine whether Osama
bin Laden was actually
hiding in a walled
compound in Abbottabad, in this
town in Pakistan, they devised
a system where they would go
door-to-door in that city and
do inoculations, and hoping
that somebody would come to the
door, they would be able to
come inside, take inoculations
from presumably family members,
and then get some type
of DNA readout on this.
Well, this all came to
light, of course, after
the death of bin Laden, and
it very much jeopardized
not only the doctors that were
involved, but it basically
turned much of that community
in Pakistan against
polio vaccinations.
So, it became -- actually,
it was very counterproductive
for public health
reasons in that country.
And the CIA has said
it won't do that again.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Daryl
Grisgraber, what do you
-- what is your sense
of what revelations
like this could do for the
effort in Yemen right now?
DARYL GRISGRABER: Well, there
are very few aid groups,
relatively speaking, operating
in Yemen as it is because
of the security situation.
There are many U.N. agencies
and INGOs, international
non-governmental
organizations, that had to
withdraw their staff.
And so compared to the need
in Yemen, there are really
very few groups addressing it.
And if this breaks trust or
puts humanitarian under fire in
some way, it will be completely
comprehensible that
organizations pull their
staffs out of there.
But that means even less
help for -- what are we
talking at, at this point?
Potentially, 17 million
people might begin starving
to death in a few weeks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Daryl Grisgraber, Eric Schmitt,
thank you both very much.
DARYL GRISGRABER: Thank you.
ERIC SCHMITT: Thank you.